feat: Convert boot-from-image servers to boot-from-volume (#191)
citynetwork/docs: docs/howto/openstack/nova/boot-image-volume.md

# Converting boot-from-image servers to boot-from-volume

You can freely move any server [between {{brand}}

> regions](move-server-between-regions), provided it uses
> boot-from-volume. Since such servers offer much more flexibility than
> those using boot-from-image, we recommend the former over the latter.

Reviewer: This reads a little awkward to me. Maybe we can change this to:
```suggestion
regions](move-server-between-regions), provided it boots from a volume
(which we generally recommend since it affords more flexibility than booting from an image).
```

> You may still have boot-from-image servers, though. If you decide to

Reviewer: Here, we'll need to explain how the user can tell the difference between a boot-from-volume and a boot-from image server. One way to do it would be to check the server's volume attachments, and see if a volume is attached as `/dev/vda` (or `/dev/sda`), i.e. the server's boot volume. Another way is the approach you use in the _Viewing the new server_ section.

Author: Understood. I will expand on that.

move any of those between regions, you will discover that you cannot do
so. The solution is first to convert them to boot-from-volume servers
and then move them. In the following, we show how to perform the
conversion using the {{gui}} or OpenStack CLI.

## Preparation

=== "{{gui}}"
    Fire up your favorite web browser and navigate to the
    [{{gui}}](https://{{gui_domain}}) start page. Log into your {{brand}}
    account if you have to.
=== "OpenStack CLI"
    To work with the OpenStack CLI, make sure to properly [enable
    it](/howto/getting-started/enable-openstack-cli) for the region your
    boot-from-image server resides in.

## Shutting down the server

=== "{{gui}}"
    Make sure the left-hand side vertical pane is in full view, then select
    Compute → [Servers](https://{{gui_domain}}/compute/servers). You will
    see all supported {{brand}} regions in the main pane. Expand the one
    with the boot-from-image server you want to convert to boot-from-volume.

>     Click the orange :fontawesome-ellipsis-circle: icon at the right of the

Reviewer: `:fontawesome-ellipsis-circle:` is not one of [shortcodes](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/icons-emojis/) that mkdocs-material supports.

Author: Aha, good to have that reference! Since the icon I want is not there, I am falling back to the three-dots-in-a-circle thing.

    server row, and from the pop-up menu that appears, select *Stop Server*.

    ![Stopping server](assets/bfi-to-bfv/shot01.png)

>     A pop-up window appears, asking if you want to stop the server. Confirm

Reviewer: For completeness' sake it would be good to have a screenshot of this pop-up, as well.

Author: When I realized I forgot to take that one screenshot, *I knew* you were going to say that :) I will create a suitable screenshot and update the document accordingly.

Reviewer: It is good to know that my opinions are easy to predict. :)

Author: That's not (always) true :)

    by clicking on the red button labeled *Yes, Stop*.
=== "OpenStack CLI"
    Assuming your boot-from-image server is named
    [`nanisivik`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nanisivik), using your
    favorite terminal application, shut it down by typing the following:

    ```bash
    openstack server stop nanisivik
    ```

    To confirm that it has finished shutting down, type:

    ```bash

>     openstack server show nanisivik -c status -f plain

Reviewer: `-f plain` is not a valid option for the `openstack` CLI. 
```suggestion
    openstack server show nanisivik -c status -f value
```

Author: ¡Dios mío! (Good catch!)

    | schema     | /v2/schemas/image                                                                   |
    | status     | queued                                                                              |
    | tags       |                                                                                     |
    | updated_at | 2023-05-10T13:31:46Z                                                                |
    | visibility | private                                                                             |
    +------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    ```

    At first, the status of the snapshot is `queued`. To make sure the
    snapshot has been successfully created, type:

    ```bash
    openstack image show nanisivik_snap -c status -f value
    ```

    You should see this:

    ```plain
    active
    ```

## Creating a volume from the snapshot

=== "{{gui}}"
    After a few seconds, the snapshot will be created and listed in the
    *Snapshots* tab. Before you proceed, take note of its size. At the

>     right-hand side of the snapshot row, click the :fontawesome-database:

Reviewer: :fontawesome-database: is not one of [shortcodes](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/icons-emojis/) that mkdocs-material supports. Did you mean to use `:fontawesome-solid-database:`, perhaps?

    icon to create a new volume off of the snapshot you just created.

    ![Creating volume from snapshot](assets/bfi-to-bfv/shot04.png)

    A new vertical pane will slide over from the right-hand side of the
    {{gui}}. Type in a name for the new volume, and choose a volume size
    **bigger** than the snapshot size. Then, you need to type in a
    description regarding the new volume.

    ![Typing in name, size, and description](assets/bfi-to-bfv/shot05.png)

    Scroll down a bit if you have to, and click the green *Create* button.

    ![Starting volume creation](assets/bfi-to-bfv/shot06.png)
=== "OpenStack CLI"
    Before creating a volume off of the snapshot you just created, jot down
    its size like this:

    ```bash
    openstack image show nanisivik_snap -c min_disk -f value
    ```

    In our example, the size of the snapshot is `50`
    [gibibytes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gigabyte#Base_2_(binary)).
    Now, go ahead and create a volume slightly larger than the size of the
    snapshot:

    ```bash

>     openstack volume create --size 56 --image nanisivik_snap nanisivik_vol

Reviewer: Any particular reason for bumping the size by more than 10%?

Author: I just like multiples of 8 :) Ideally, 50GiB should not exist. Acceptable values in that vicinity would be 48GiB or 56GiB. But the world is a strange place, so...

    |                              | '19ffeb4d-3016-481f-886e-6caecc525fc2', 'user_id':                |
    |                              | 'c096cf99f65a4d22a6954b67d2ec11d7', 'image_type': 'snapshot',     |
    |                              | 'owner_id': '94109c764a754e24ac0f6b01aef82359', 'image_state':    |
    |                              | 'available', 'image_location': 'snapshot', 'image_id':            |
    |                              | '1a50720b-af1c-4a16-ba19-b89dbee251f0', 'image_name':             |
    |                              | 'nanisivik_snap', 'container_format': 'bare', 'disk_format':      |
    |                              | 'raw', 'min_disk': '50', 'min_ram': '0', 'size': '53687091200'}   |
    +------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
    ```

## Deleting the boot-from-image server

=== "{{gui}}"
    Go to the servers view by selecting Compute →
    [Servers](https://{{gui_domain}}/compute/servers), and locate the
    boot-from-image server. It is time to delete it, so click the orange

>     :fontawesome-ellipsis-circle: icon at the right of the server row, and

Reviewer: Again, `:fontawesome-ellipsis-circle:` is not one of [shortcodes](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/icons-emojis/) that mkdocs-material supports.

    from the pop-up menu that appears, select *Delete Server*.

    ![Deleting server](assets/bfi-to-bfv/shot08.png)

    A window titled *About to delete a server* will appear, asking you if
    you want to proceed with the deletion. Click the red button labeled
    *Yes, Delete*.

    ![Confirming server deletion](assets/bfi-to-bfv/shot09.png)
=== "OpenStack CLI"
    Since you have a snapshot and a volume of your server, you can now
    delete it:

    ```bash
    openstack server delete nanisivik
    ```

    If the operation succeeds, you should see no output on your terminal.

## Creating a new boot-from-volume server

=== "{{gui}}"
    Now, go back to your volumes by selecting Storage →
    [Volumes](https://{{gui_domain}}/storage/volumes). Tick the volume you

>     created a bit earlier, click the orange :fontawesome-ellipsis-circle:

Reviewer: `:fontawesome-ellipsis-circle:` again.

> # Converting a boot-from-image server to boot-from-volume

Reviewer: Final nit: YAML front matter with one-sentence `description`, please.

Author: Ouch, that was **not** a nit by **any** stretch of the imagination :/

You can freely move any server [between {{brand}}
regions](move-server-between-regions), provided it boots from a volume

> (which we generally recommend since it affords more flexibility than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(which we generally recommend, since it affords more flexibility than
```

booting from an image). You may still have boot-from-image servers,

> though. To ensure a particular server is of that type, you can go to the

Reviewer: I use "ensure" as a verb meaning "ascertain that something is in a *desired* state". That is not the case here, so I would instead suggest:

```suggestion
though. To verify that a particular server is of that type, you can go to the
```

    | multiattach         | False                                |
    | name                | nanisivik_vol                        |
    | properties          |                                      |
    | replication_status  | None                                 |
    | size                | 56                                   |
    | snapshot_id         | None                                 |
    | source_volid        | None                                 |
    | status              | creating                             |
    | type                | ceph_hdd                             |
    | updated_at          | None                                 |
    | user_id             | c096cf99f65a4d22a6954b67d2ec11d7     |
    +---------------------+--------------------------------------+
    ```

    As you can see in the example above, we named our volume
    `nanisivik_vol`, and its `status` was at first `creating`. You may check
    the progress of this operation by typing this:

    ```bash
    openstack volume show nanisivik_vol -c status -f value
    ```

    As soon as the new volume is ready, the `status` becomes `available`.

## Viewing the new volume

=== "{{gui}}"

>     In the left-hand side vertical pane, select Storage →
>     [Volumes](https://{{gui_domain}}/storage/volumes). In the main pane,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In the left-hand side vertical pane, select *Storage →
    [Volumes](https://{{gui_domain}}/storage/volumes)*. In the main pane,
```
or
```suggestion
    In the left-hand side vertical pane, select *Storage* →
    [*Volumes*](https://{{gui_domain}}/storage/volumes). In the main pane,
```

# Converting boot-from-image servers to boot-from-volume

You can freely move any server [between {{brand}}
regions](move-server-between-regions), provided it boots from a volume
(which we generally recommend since it affords more flexibility than
booting from an image). You may still have boot-from-image servers,
though. To ensure a particular server is of that type, you can go to the
{{gui}}, locate the server, and expand its detailed view. Go to the
*Details* tab and pay attention to the *Attached volumes* field. If this

> is a boot-from-image server, it should say *No attached volumes*.

Reviewer: Hmmm is this a reliable test? What if it's a boot-from-image server that has had a (non-boot) volume attached after spinning up?

Isn't looking the prior field, "Boot Target", a better option here?

Author: It sure is :)
